---
layout: post
title: A Quick Tour of Géométrie algébrique et géométrie analytique
date: 2022-12-10
last_modified_at: 2022-12-17
tags: [Algebraic Geometry]
toc:  true
math: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
In this blog, we will introduce some basic fact about GAGA-principle. Actually I only vaguely knew that this is a correspondence between analytic geometry and algebraic geometry over $\mathbb{C}$ before. So as we may use GAGA frequently, we will summarize in this blog to facilitate learning and use.
<!--more-->

The original paper is J.P. Serre's famous paper [Serre56][^1] which consider the projective integral case(there is a book [AA07][^3] for this). Then Grothendieck extended the theory to proper $\mathbb{C}$-schemes locally of finite types with analytic spaces in [SGA-I][^2]. Here we mainly follows the surveys [GAGA13][^4], [Wiki][^5].

There is much more development of GAGA in arithmatic analytic geometry ([Conrad-Temkin](https://arxiv.org/abs/0706.3441)) and even in stacks and moduli spaces (see [GAGA in nlab](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/GAGA#references)).

## 1. Basic facts about analytic spaces
### 1.1. Basic definitions
**Definition 1.1.1.** Pick $U\subset\mathbb{C}^n$ and let $f\_1, . . . , f\_k$ be holomorphic functions on $U$ and $\mathscr{I}$ be the coherent sheaf of ideals generated by these functions. An **affine analytic space** $(X, \mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X})$ is a locally ringed space whose underlying space is
\\[X=\\{y\in U:f\_1(y)=\cdots=f\_k(y)=0\\}\subset U\\]
and whose sheaf of rings is defined by $i^{−1}\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{U}/\mathscr{I}$ where $i:X\to U$.

**Definition 1.1.2.** An **analytic space** $(X, \mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X})$ is a locally ringed space such that $X$ is a Hausdorff (separated) topological space and there is an open cover $\\{V\_i\\}$ of $X$ such that each $(V\_i, \mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_X\|\_{V\_i})$ is an affine analytic space.

**Remark.** If $X$ is smooth, then it is actually a complex manifold. Moreover, we have $\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X,x}\cong\mathbb{C}\\{x\_1,...,x\_k\\}/I$.

**Proposition 1.1.3.** Let $\mathscr{O}^{Reg}\_{X}\subset \mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X}$ be the subsheaf of regular functions on $X$. Then for any $x\in X$ we have \\[(\mathscr{O}^{Reg}\_{X,x})^{\wedge}\cong(\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X,x})^{\wedge}.\\]

*Proof.* Omitted, see paper [Serre56][^1]. $\blacksquare$

**Remark.** One can also show that $\mathscr{O}^{Reg}\_{X,x}\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X,x}$ is faithfully flat (see[^4] Proposition 1.8)!

### 1.2. Analytifications of $\mathbb{C}$-schemes
**Definition 1.2.1. (Analytification).** Fix $X$ be a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type and its space $(X(\mathbb{C}),\mathscr{O}\_X\|\_{X(\mathbb{C})})$ of $\mathbb{C}$-rational points. In the affine case, we have $X\cong\mathrm{Spec}\mathbb{C}[x\_1,...,x\_n]/I$. Then we endow $X(\mathbb{C})$ with a finer topology induced as a subspace topology of $\mathbb{C}^n$ as zeros of $I$, we call it $X^{\mathrm{an}}$. Let \\[\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x}:=\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{\mathbb{C}^n,x}/I\cdot \mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{\mathbb{C}^n,x}\\] and we get the analytification of $X$ be an analytic space $(X^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}})$.

**Remark.** There is a natural morphism of locally ringed spaces $\phi:(X^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}})\to(X,\mathscr{O}\_X)$ as $X^{\mathrm{an}}\to X(\mathbb{C})\subset X$ and $\phi^{-1} \mathscr{O}\_X\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}$ as $f\mapsto f\circ\phi$. Actually by the **Proposition 1.1.3** we get the map $\phi\_x: \mathscr{O}\_{X,x}\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x}$ induce $\mathscr{O}\_{X,x}^{\wedge}\cong(\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x})^{\wedge}$. Moreover, we have $\mathscr{O}\_{X,x}\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x}$ is faithfully flat by previous Remark.

**Theorem 1.2.2.** Fix $X$, a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type. Consider the functor 
\\[\Phi\_X:\mathbf{AnSp}\to\mathbf{Sets},\mathcal{X}\mapsto\mathrm{Hom}\_{\mathbb{C}}(\mathcal{X},X)\\]
where $\mathbf{AnSp}$ be the category of analytic spaces and $\mathrm{Hom}$ be the set of morphisms of locally ringed spaces. Then $\Phi\_X$ representable by the analytic space $X^{\mathrm{an}}$ and the equivalence $\Phi\_X\cong\mathrm{Hom}(-,X^{\mathrm{an}})$ induced by $\phi$.

*Sketch of proof.* WLOG we let $X$ is affine. We find that: 

(i) If $X\subset Y$ be an open immersion and $Y$ satisfies this property, then so is $X$. This is because $X^{\mathrm{an}}\cong Y^{\mathrm{an}}\times\_YX$ and locally $X^{\mathrm{an}}$ and $Y^{\mathrm{an}}$ are isomorphism;

(ii) If $X\subset Y$ be an closed immersion and $Y$ satisfies this property, then so is $X$. This is because locally if $\mathscr{O}\_{X,x}\cong\mathscr{O}\_{Y,x}/I$, then $\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x}\cong\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{Y^{\mathrm{an}},x}/I\cdot\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{Y^{\mathrm{an}},x}$;

(iii) We have $(X\times Y)^{\mathrm{an}}\cong X^{\mathrm{an}}\times Y^{\mathrm{an}}$.

Hence we just show the case when $X=\mathbb{A}^1\_{\mathbb{C}}$. One can show that
<html>
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
  <script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
  <script id="MathJax-script" async
          src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
  </script>
</head>
<body>
<p>
\begin{align*}
&\mathrm{Hom}_{\mathbb{C}}(\mathcal{X},\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathbb{C}})\cong\mathrm{Hom}_{\mathbb{C}}(\mathbb{C}[x],\Gamma(\mathcal{X},\mathscr{O}^{Hol}_{\mathcal{X}}))\\
&\cong\mathrm{Hom}_{\mathbb{C}}(\mathbb{C}\{x\},\Gamma(\mathcal{X},\mathscr{O}^{Hol}_{\mathcal{X}}))\cong
  \mathrm{Hom}_{\mathbb{C}}(\mathcal{X},(\mathbb{A}^1_{\mathbb{C}})^{\mathrm{an}})
\end{align*}
</p>
</body>
</html>
and well done. $\blacksquare$

**Remark.** Using this theorem, we can get that for any morphism of these schemes $f:X\to Y$ lifts to a unique morphism of locally ringed spaces $f^{\mathrm{an}}:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to Y^{\mathrm{an}}$ such that $f\circ\phi\_X=\phi_Y\circ f^{\mathrm{an}}$. We also have $X^{\mathrm{an}}\times\_{Z^{\mathrm{an}}}X^{\mathrm{an}}\cong(X\times\_ZY)^{\mathrm{an}}$.

## 2. Collection of properties and morphisms between $\mathbb{C}$-schemes and analytic spaces
**Proposition 2.1.** Let$X$ be a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type and $T\subset X$ a constructible subset. Then $\phi^{-1}(\overline{T})=\overline{\phi^{-1}(T)}$. In particular, $T$ is closed (open, dense, respectively) if and only if $\phi^{-1}(T)$ is closed (open, dense, respectively).

*Proof.* See [GAGA13][^4] Proposition 2.3. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 2.2.** Let $X$ be a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type. Let $\mathbf{P}$ be one of the following properties: **non-empty; Cohen-Macaulay; $S_n$; regular; $R_n$; normal; reduced; dimension $n$; discrete; connected; irreducible; integral**. Then $X$ has property $\mathbf{P}$ if and only if $X^{\mathrm{an}}$ has property $\mathbf{P}$.

*Proof.* See [GAGA13][^4] Proposition 2.2, 2.5. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 2.3.** Let $f:X\to Y$ be a morphism between $\mathbb{C}$-schemes $X,Y$ locally of finite type and $f^{\mathrm{an}}:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to Y^{\mathrm{an}}$ induced by $f$. Let $\mathbf{Q}$ be one of the following properties: **flat; unramified; étale; smooth; injective; open immersion; isomorphism; a monomorphism**. Let $\mathbf{R}$ be one of the following properties: **surjective; dominant; closed immersion; immersion; projective; proper; finite**. Then $f$ has property $\mathbf{Q}$ if and only if $f^{\mathrm{an}}$ has property $\mathbf{Q}$. Moreover, if $f$ is of finite type, then $f$ has property $\mathbf{R}$ if and only if $f^{\mathrm{an}}$ has property $\mathbf{R}$.

*Proof.* See [GAGA13][^4] Proposition 3.2. $\blacksquare$

## 3. The GAGA theorems
### 3.1. Analytifications of coherent sheaves
**Proposition-Definition 3.1.1.** Let $\phi:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to X$ be the canonical map. Pick $\mathscr{F}\in\mathbf{Coh}(X)$, we define 
\\[\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}:=\phi^* \mathscr{F}=\phi^{-1}\mathscr{F}\otimes\_{\phi^{-1}\mathscr{O}\_X}\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}.\\]
This defines a functor \\[\phi^* :\mathbf{Coh}(X)\to \mathbf{Coh}(X^{\mathrm{an}}),\mathscr{F}\mapsto\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}.\\]
Then $\phi^* $ is exact, faithful and conservative.

*Proof.* Exactness follows from the fact that $\phi^{-1}$ is exact and $\mathscr{O}\_{X,x}\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}},x}$ is flat. It is faithful by the faithfully flatness of $\phi^{-1}\mathscr{O}\_X\to\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}$ and the fact that $X(\mathbb{C})\subset X$ is dense. Conservativeness follows from faithfulness and flatness. $\blacksquare$

**Remark.** We have adjoint pair $(\phi^* ,\phi\_* )$, hence $\mathscr{F}\to\phi\_* \phi^* \mathscr{F}=\phi\_* \mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}$.

### 3.2. Two main results of GAGA
**Construction 3.2.1.** Consider $f:X\to Y$, $\phi\_X:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to X$, $\phi\_Y:Y^{\mathrm{an}}\to Y$ and $f^{\mathrm{an}}:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to Y^{\mathrm{an}}$. Pick $\mathscr{F}\in\mathbf{Coh}(X)$ and as $\phi\_X^* $ exact, we get 
<html>
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
  <script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
  <script id="MathJax-script" async
          src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
  </script>
</head>
<body>
<p>
\begin{align*}
&\phi_Y^*Rf_*\mathscr{F}\to \phi_Y^*Rf_*(\phi_{X,*}\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}})\\
&\to \phi_Y^*R(f\circ\phi_X)_*\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}=\phi_Y^*R(\phi_Y\circ f^{\mathrm{an}})_*\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}\\
&=R(\phi_Y^*\circ\phi_{Y,*}\circ f^{\mathrm{an}}_*)\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}\to Rf^{\mathrm{an}}_*\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}.
\end{align*}
</p>
</body>
</html>
Hence we get 
\\[\theta^i:(R^if\_* \mathscr{F})^{\mathrm{an}}\to R^if^{\mathrm{an}}\_* \mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}.\\]

**Remark.** One can describe this by relative Čech cohomology when $f$ is **proper**. In both category $\mathbf{AnSp}$ (for any sheaves) and $\mathbf{Sch}/\mathbb{C}$ (for quasi-coherent sheaves), we have: for open covering $\mathfrak{U}:=\\{U\_j\\}\_{j\in I}$, let 
\\[\mathscr{C}^i(\mathfrak{U},\mathscr{F},f\_* )=\bigoplus\_{\|J\|=i,J\subset I}(f\|\_{U\_J})\_* \mathscr{F}\|\_{U\_J},\\]
then we get \\[R^if\_* \mathscr{F}=\varinjlim\_{\mathfrak{U}}\mathscr{H}^i(\mathscr{C}^i(\mathfrak{U},\mathscr{F},f\_* )).\\]
When taking some affine open sets (good cover), we can get 
\\[R^if\_* \mathscr{F}=\mathscr{H}^i(\mathscr{C}^i(\mathfrak{U},\mathscr{F},f\_* )).\\]
Then the $\eta^i$ is trivial.

**Theorem 3.2.2. (GAGA-I).** Let $f:X\to Y$ be a proper morphism of $\mathbb{C}$-schemes locally of finite type and $\mathscr{F}\in\mathbf{Coh}(X)$.
Then, for any $i\geq 0$, the morphism
\\[\theta^i:(R^if\_* \mathscr{F})^{\mathrm{an}}\to R^if^{\mathrm{an}}\_* \mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}\\]
is an isomorphism.

*Sketch of Proof.* When $f$ is projective, this is not hard and very standard (if you have no idea about this, please go to review the basic AG). First consider the case when $X=\mathbb{P}^n\_Y$ and prove this when $\mathscr{F}=\mathscr{O}\_X$ by calculation and then prove the case when $\mathscr{F}=\mathscr{O}\_X(n)$ by induction. As for any $\mathscr{F}\in\mathbf{Coh}(X)$, we get the exact sequence
\\[0\to\mathscr{G}\to\bigoplus\_i\mathscr{O}\_X(n\_i)\to\mathscr{F}\to0.\\]
By inducting on the rank of $\mathscr{F}$ and using the long exact sequence, we may get the result.
Next consider the general case. Using the fact that if $i:X\to\mathbb{P}^n\_Y$ be a closed immersion, then $(i\_* \mathscr{F})^{\mathrm{an}}=i\_* ^{\mathrm{an}}\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}$ by checking stalks.

For general proper $f$, we need use lemme de dévissage and Chow's Lemma. It's not so hard but we will omit it. We refer Théorème XII.4.2 in [SGA-I][^2]. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 3.2.3. (GAGA-II).** Let $X$ be a proper $\mathbb{C}$-scheme and canonical map $\phi:X^{\mathrm{an}}\to X$, then the functor
\\[\phi^* :\mathbf{Coh}(X)\to \mathbf{Coh}(X^{\mathrm{an}}),\mathscr{F}\mapsto\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}}\\]
is an equivalence of categories.

*Sketch of Proof.* We only show that the functor is fully faithful. The proof of essential surjectivity is complicated and we refer Théorème XII.4.4 in [SGA-I][^2]. By **GAGA-I**, let $\mathscr{F},\mathscr{G}\in\mathbf{Coh}(X)$ we get
<html>
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
  <script src="https://polyfill.io/v3/polyfill.min.js?features=es6"></script>
  <script id="MathJax-script" async
          src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
  </script>
</head>
<body>
<p>
\begin{align*}
&\mathrm{Hom}_{\mathscr{O}_X}(\mathscr{F},\mathscr{G})\cong H^0(X,\mathscr{H}om_{\mathscr{O}_X}(\mathscr{F},\mathscr{G}))\\
&\cong H^0(X^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{H}om_{\mathscr{O}_X}(\mathscr{F},\mathscr{G})^{\mathrm{an}})\\
&\cong H^0(X^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{H}om_{\mathscr{O}^{Hol}_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}}(\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{G}^{\mathrm{an}}))\\
&\cong \mathrm{Hom}_{\mathscr{O}^{Hol}_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}}(\mathscr{F}^{\mathrm{an}},\mathscr{G}^{\mathrm{an}})
\end{align*}
</p>
</body>
</html>
where the last isomorphism is because $\mathscr{F}$ is coherent and $\mathscr{O}^{Hol}\_{X^{\mathrm{an}}}$ is flat over $\phi^{-1}\mathscr{O}\_X$. $\blacksquare$

## 4. Applications: generalized Chow’s theorem and a glimpse of Riemann’s existence theorem
**Theorem 4.1. (Generalized Chow's Theorem).** Let $X$ be a proper $\mathbb{C}$-scheme. Then for any closed analytic subspace $\mathcal{Y}\subset X^{\mathrm{an}}$, there exists a closed subscheme $Y\subset X$ such that $\mathcal{Y}=Y^{\mathrm{an}}$.

*Proof.* Use ideal sheaves and **GAGA-I**, well done. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 4.2.** Let $X$ be a separated $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type. Then, all proper analytic subspaces of $X^{\mathrm{an}}$ are analytifications of some closed subschemes of $X$.

*Proof.* Checking locally we may let $X$ is of finite type. Then by Nagata compactification theorem and Generalized Chow's Theorem, well done. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 4.3.** Let $S$ be a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type. Let $X$ be a proper $S$-scheme and $Y$ be a $S$-scheme locally of finite type. Then we have the canonical isomorphism \\[\mathrm{Hom}\_S(X,Y)\cong \mathrm{Hom}\_{S^{\mathrm{an}}}(X^{\mathrm{an}},Y^{\mathrm{an}}).\\]

*Proof.* Omitted, see Theorem 5.4 in [GAGA13][^4]. $\blacksquare$

**Theorem 4.4. (Riemann’s existence theorem).** Let $X$ be a $\mathbb{C}$-scheme locally of finite type. The functor
\\[\Phi:\mathbf{Fét}(X)\to \mathbf{Fét}(X^{\mathrm{an}}) (\cong\mathrm{FTopCov}(X^{\mathrm{an}})),f\mapsto f^{\mathrm{an}}\\]
induces an equivalence.

*Proof.* Omitted, see Théorème XII.5.1 in [SGA-I][^2]. $\blacksquare$

Actually, using Riemann’s existence theorem we can show that $\pi_1^{\mathrm{ét}}(X,x)\cong(\pi_1(X^{\mathrm{an}},x))^{\wedge}$, the profinite completion, see Corollaire XII.5.2 in [SGA-I][^2].

[^1]: [Serre56] Jean-Pierre Serre, Géométrie algébrique et géométrie analytique Université de Grenoble. Annales de l’Institut Fourier 6: 1–42, (1956) doi:10.5802/aif.59, ISSN 0373-0956, MR 0082175.

[^2]: [SGA-I] Alexander Grothendieck, SGA I, Exposé XII.

[^3]: [AA07] Amnon Neeman, Algebraic and analytic geometry, London Math. Soc. Lec. Note Series 345, 2007.

[^4]: [GAGA13] Yan Zhao, Géométrie algébrique et géométrie analytique, 2013.

[^5]: [Wiki] Wikipedia, [Algebraic geometry and analytic geometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_geometry_and_analytic_geometry).
